# Computational Modeling of Calcium Transients in Dendritic Spines

# Abstract: 

In this report, we modify a deterministic model showcasing calcium transients in dendritic spines through various sources and sinks as a system of partial differential equations. We consider boundary conditions at the plasma membrane, the neck, and the spine apparatus (an extension of the endoplasmic reticulum) to model the diffusion of cytosolic calcium in specified spine geometries. All models were designed through COMSOL. The original model, published by Bell et. al., considered a short time scale (10-100ms), considered the spine apparatus of the spine primarily as a sink for cytosolic calcium, and treated the calcium at the base of the dendritic spine neck as an isolated, or clamped system. We strived towards developing a more physiological approach to model the cascade of calcium through the dendritic spine by implementing a longer time scale (10ms-15s), adding ryanodine receptors to incorporate a source of calcium in the spine apparatus, adding an efflux term at the base of the dendritic spine neck, and modeling additional geometries. Increasing the time scale allowed us to visualize the long lasting effects of the neck efflux and the ryanodine receptors. The neck efflux allowed us to treat the base of the neck as a dynamic system, confirming the localization of calcium within the spine. The incorporation of the ryanodine receptors allowed us to analyze the dominating effects of the spine apparatus and determine that its role in calcium dynamics shifts between being a sink in short and long timescales and a source in intermediate timescales. We considered modeling long-thin spines and stubby spines as a way to examine how other biologically relevant spine geometries behave. In doing so we also re-emphasized the importance of the surface area to volume ratio of the spine in determining calcium dynamics as found in the original paper by Bell et al..
